---
layout: page
title: WEAKER VESSEL
excerpt: Excerpt
author: Fang Wang
image: 93.jpg
tags: Excerpt
permalink: /writings43/
---

**T**here was a curio shop on a commercial street intersection. A porcelain image of the *Kannon* stood between the shop and the street. It had the stature of a twelve-year-old girl. When trolley cars passed by, the cold skin of the *Kannon* would quiver in company with the glass-paneled door of the shop. Every time I passed by that image, I was afflicted with a mild concern that it might topple over onto the street.…Hence my dream.

 

**T**he body of the *Kannon* keeled over straight at me.

&emsp;&emsp;It abruptly, eerily extended its long, abundantly-drooping, white arms and threw them around my neck.    
&emsp;&emsp;I leaped back, startled at the creepy way in which the arms alone took on life and at the cold feel of the porcelain skin.   
&emsp;&emsp;Without a sound, the *Kannon* image lay in pieces in the street.   
&emsp;&emsp;Then she was there picking up the pieces.   
&emsp;&emsp;She crouched low, busily absorbed in gathering up the porcelain fragments which, gleaming, were scattered about.   
&emsp;&emsp;Astonished to see her there, I was trying to open my mouth to offer an excuse when I found myself wide awake.   
&emsp;&emsp;The whole affair, beginning with the toppling of the *Kannon*, seemed to have been but a moment.

 

**I** tried to fix a meaning to the dream.

&emsp;&emsp;*“…unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel…”*   
&emsp;&emsp;These words from the Bible often drifted through my mind those days. I always associated the words “weaker vessel” with a porcelain bowl. And with my girl.   
&emsp;&emsp;Young girls truly are fragile. Just falling in love, in a sense, is a shattering experience for a young woman. That is how I had been thinking.   
&emsp;&emsp;…Then in my dream perhaps my girl was busily absorbed in gathering up the broken pieces of herself?

 

****

Written by Kawabata Yasunari 1924

Translated in Bloomington, Indiana by P. Metevelis 1978

Edited 1981