---
layout: page   
title: 奥德赛（Odyssey）英译本考   
excerpt: Writings   
author: Fang Wang   
image: 88.jpg  
tags: Excerpt  
permalink: /Odyssey/
---

IN ROBERT FITZGERALD (VERSE):    
“He said     
to put cheer in his son:    
‘Telemakhos,     
you are going into battle against pikemen     
where hearts of men are tried. I count on you to bring no shame upon your forefathers.     
In fighting power, we have excelled this lot     
in every generation.’    
Said his son:    
’If you are curious, Father, watch and see         
the stuff that’s in me. No more talk of shame.”    
And old Laertes cried aloud:    
‘Ah, what a day for me, dear gods!    
to see my son and grandson vie in courage!’”    

IN RICHARD LATTIMORE (VERSE):    
Odysseus “spoke to his dear son, Telemachos:     
‘Telemachos, now yourself being present, where men do battle,     
and the bravest are singled out from the rest, you must be certain     
not to shame the blood of your fathers, for we in time past     
all across the world have surpassed in manhood and valor.’    
Then the thoughtful Telemachos said to him in answer: ‘You will see,     
dear father, if you wish, that as far as my will goes,     
I will not shame my blood that come from you, which you speak of.’    
So he spoke, and Laertes also rejoiced, and said to them:      
‘What day is this for me, dear gods? I am very happy.     
My son and my son’s son are contending over their courage.’”    


IN STEPHEN MITCHELL (VERSE):    
“Odysseus […] said to his son, ‘Telemachus, in the thick     
of battle, where warriors prove their worth, I expect     
that you will bring honor and not disgrace to our family,     
who throughout the world are known for our strength and courage.’    
Telemachus answers, ‘I think you will see for yourself,     
Father, how well I distinguish myself in the fighting.     
I won’t bring shame on your lineage, as you put it.’    
When he heard this, Laertes was filled with joy, and he said,     
'Dear gods, what a day! How proud and happy I am     
to see my son and my grandson competing in valor!’”


IN ALEXANDER POPE (VERSE):    
“‘Behold, Telemachus!’ (Nor fear the sight,)     
The brave embattled, the grim front of the fight!     
The valiant with the valiant must contend.     
Shame not the line whence glorious you descend.     
Wide o’er the world their martial fame was spread;      
Regard thyself, the living and the dead.’    
‘Thy eyes, great father! On this battled cast,     
Shall learn from me Penelope was chaste.’     
So spoke Telemachus: the gallant boy     
Good old Laertes heard with panting joy    
‘And bless’d! thrice bless’d this happy day! (he cries,)     
The day that shows me, ere I close my eyes,     
A son and grandson of the Arcesian name     
Strive for fair virtue, and contest for fame!’”    


IN PETER GREEN (VERSE):    
Odysseus “addressed his dear son Telemachos, saying:     
‘Telemachos, you’ll now learn for yourself’—having come     
where battle picks out the truly best men fighting’—     
not in any way to disgrace your father’s ancestors, who     
long ago excelled the world over in manly strength and valor.’    
Sagacious Telemachos responded to him, saying:     
‘You’ll see me, if you so wish, dear father’—such is my spirit’—     
in no way, as you say, disgracing your ancestry.’    
So he spoke. Laertes was glad, and made this declaration:     
‘What a great day for me, you kind gods! I’ve joy past measure!    
Here are my son and my grandson contending over valor!'”    


IN WILSON (VERSE):    
Odysseus said, “‘Now, son,     
soon you will have experience of fighting     
in battle, the true test of worth. You must     
not shame your father’s family; for years     
we have been known across the world for courage     
and manliness.’    
Telemachus inhaled,     
then said, ‘Just watch me, Father, if you want    
to see my spirit. I will bring no shame     
onto your family. You should not speak of shame.’    
Laertes, thrilled, cried out, ‘Ah, gods!     
A happy day for me! My son and grandson     
are arguing about how tough they are!’”    


IN FAGLES (VERSE)    
The good soldier Odysseus thrilled to see her,        
turned to his son and said in haste, “Telemachus,    
you’ll learn soon enough —as you move up to fight    
where champions strive to prove themselves the best —    
not to disgrace your father’s line a moment.    
In battle prowess we’ve excelled for ages    
all across the world.”    
Telemachus reassured him,    
“Now you’ll see, if you care to watch, father,    
now I’m fired up. Disgrace, you say?    
I won’t disgrace your line!”    
Laertes called out in deep delight,    
“What a day for me, dear gods! What joy —    
my son and my grandson vying over courage!”


IN E. V. RIEU (PROSE):
Odysseus “turned at once to his dear son and said: ‘Telemachus, when you find yourself in the thick of battle, where the best men prove their mettle, you will soon learn how not to disgrace your father’s house. In all the world there has been none like ours for courage and manliness.’
And the thoughtful Telemachus replied: ‘If you care to, father, you will see me in my present mood by no means disgracing my father’s house, as you put it.’
Laertes was delighted. ‘Dear gods!’ he exclaimed. ‘What a day this is to warm my heart! My son and grandson competing in valour!’”


IN THE LOEB (PROSE):
Odysseus “at once spoke to Telemachus, his staunch son:
‘Telemachus, now shall you learn this—having yourself come to the place where battle distinguishes those who are bravest—to bring no disgrace on the house of your fathers, who in times past have excelled in strength and valor over all the earth.’
And wise Telemachus answered him: ‘You shall see me, if you wish, dear father, as far as my present mode goes, bringing no disgrace whatsoever on your lineage, as you suggest.’
So said he, and Laertes was glad, and spoke, saying:
‘What is this day that you have brought me, kind gods? I utterly rejoice: my son and my son’s son are quarreling over which is the bravest.’”

****
Reference: [Why I’m reading all the English translations of The Odyssey](http://sallyallenbooks.com/2018/05/reading-translation-odyssey/) By Sally
